---
layout: distill
title: for the scientific community
description: excerpts i had most fun writing.
img: assets/img/card-donaldo.jpg
importance: 3
# category: work

toc:
  - name: Citizenship studies
  - name: Dual citizenship
  - name: Belonging
  - name: An empirical study


---
<span style="font-size:14px;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
<b>international immigration • legal status • full membership • feeling at home</b>
</span>
<span style="font-size:15px;font-style:italic;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
<br>
<br>Global mobility and international immigration bring to citizenship – understood as formal membership, and as such, associated primarily with the political realm – a sociological implication that has not been duly incorporated into the academic debate. Within a macro and normative approach, which has been the centre of the literature on dual citizenship, debaters are essentially concerned with political issues; and these political concerns are transposed to the new scenario of increasing (and increasingly fluid) international movement of people, as if, once determined, they would suffice to resolve all that that matters. Strikingly, however, there is a scarcity of research on the micro perspective – and so the debate abounds with assumptions that may or may not make sense, or it tends to generalise findings without pondering the diverse nature of the phenomenon. Making sense of dual citizenship in the contemporary world requires the enthusiasm of scholars to study this topic as much as a reserve to recognise that it involves multiple circumstances – and more than that, it involves personal narratives entangled in a broader web of meaning-making. Revealingly, Spiro argues that dual citizenship ultimately undermines state-based identities (2016, 131). Even though he is an ardent defender of the tolerance of the status, unlike Franck (1996), he does not conceive of multiple horizontal belongings. Hence, « plural citizenship will almost always involve one citizenship that is dearer than the other » (Spiro 2010, 128). What does dearer mean, though? And to which dual citizens?
<br> 
<br> If dual citizenship is only measured in political terms – or to fit a closed understanding of it –, then the 'use' of each one becomes invariably 'asymmetrical' and potentially mutually exclusive. However, people assign meanings to this status on different grounds than those that the literature has traditionally considered (and been willing to fathom). Moving beyond the notion that it is just an instrumental asset, empirical studies have uncovered new dimensions in the way dual citizenship is interpreted within long-distance naturalisations: Knott (2019) found that people simply understand it to be their right, and Leuchter (2014) that, regardless of the motivation to pursue a second citizenship, the status became a tool that strengthens one’s attachment to their country of origin. What about dual citizens who are also immigrants? Are they bound to be only 'legal aliens' enjoying a bureaucratic convenience (Englishmen in New York)? Yanasmayan’s (2015) brilliant study transcended the conventional construct that allowing immigrants to keep their original citizenship leads to higher rates of naturalisation (and this, in turn, to better social and economics outcomes). It revealed deeper levels of understanding of the impact of dual citizenship on lived experiences: the toleration of the status allowed Turkish immigrants to retain an emotional link with it more generally, paving the way for new experiences of meaningful belonging. My findings point to the same direction: dual citizenship is not about transferring or dividing loyalties, as it is about extending possibilities of belonging – for if dual citizenship is instrumentally used to immigrate or remain in the host state, it is the very pillar of one’s feeling of belonging (even if this belonging is perceived differently among people). In this respect, the literature on belonging can play an essential role in illuminating the 'wh-questions' of the significance of dual citizenship in the context of immigration, as it provides mechanisms to understand how the status is linked to life experiences in subtle, unexplored ways.
<br>
<br> As most of the individuals I interviewed have acquired dual citizenship on the basis of ancestry, I take this clue within the literature to discuss my findings:
<br>
<br> « Dual citizenship offered for third-country citizens by various EU member states raises another novel dilemma. [...] As critics note, these states ‘open back doors’ to the EU by generously handing out citizenship to many third-country nationals, who may move and work in any of the EU member states. » (Pogonyi 2011, 699)
<br> 
<br> This form of naturalisation is commonly understood as an external citizenship, whose significance is exhausted in being a 'portable good' within a stratified global society (Harpaz 2015, 2019; Harpaz and Mateos 2019). However, if immigration takes place, then Pogonyi’s remark is accurate: as my research has shown, these 'back doors to the EU' did open the door to the homes of the people I interviewed.
<br> 
<br> Regardless of whether Franck’s (1996) thesis about the reason behind the growing tolerance of dual citizenship was correct or not, the experiences of the participants in my study are in consonance with his understanding that people can develop multiple national affiliations and possibly 'identities' – and that such multiple belonging may become an essential part of one’s personal narrative. The people I interviewed have chosen to immigrate and make their host societies their home – those under 'home in progress', at least for now – and many display aspects of self-identification that reflects an active personal pursuit – even if as 'Europeans'. This path is one that admittedly encounters ambivalences and confrontations. And in this scenario, what becomes salient is the role that citizenship plays, in that it formally grants their right to stay, permanently, where they are; they do not have to recurrently answer the question « why are you here? » to secure temporary permission with the administrative authorities. In short, they are entitled to the place.
<br> 
<br> The participants are much aware of citizenship as a project of the politics of belonging, for it is this property that gives them confidence to 'build their lives [and homes] there, with the expectation that they can continue to do so' (Lenard 2018). In this sense, with the official status, they know that they also 'belong without question' (Skey 2013); citizenship is absolute. For them, formal membership is not 'just another bureaucratic hurdle to make life a little bit easier', like those who respond to 'the call for the Super Citizen' with disaffection in Badenhoop’s study (2021, 575). This points to a specificity of the sample in this study: they are a young and mobile generation for whom immigration is/becomes an option, not a necessity. It is in this context that a EU passport stands out, as it also allows individuals to settle in different countries within the Union (it would be interesting to compare this with how native Europeans of similar age and educational background make sense of and use their European passport – Blanchard’s (2020) research, for instance, shows that young Italians born in Italy are engaged in a similar intra-EU mobility as the Argentinian and Chilean dual citizens she studied).
<br> 
<br> Moreover, the respondents do not lead transnational lives as they tend to limit their understanding of home to where they reside now. In general, being in Brazil corresponds to familiarity, but also to nostalgia or a 'live museum' of their own lives. Thus, these individuals are not 'longing-to-be' in Brazil, nor have they joined a community of Brazilians in their host societies in the quest to keep 'home' close (Hedetoft and Hjort 2002, vii). This leads to the next point. In contrast to children born to immigrant parents in Simonsen’s study (2018), the participants moved to their host countries as adults and, as such, they did not always belong in these societies; their feeling at home is not self-evident for 'having been born and raised in the country and always lived there' (Simonsen 2018, 133). Importantly, however, in line with Simonsen’s findings, mine also show that one does not need to identify with the national collectivity – and be seen as one – to feel at home and feel like staying – after all, they are formally entitled to do so. That being said, self-identification, even if as a process with a situational character (or precisely as one), does seem to be an important element for those in 'found home' – a process of becoming negotiated in the everyday life amid symbolic boundaries from the native-national community – in the question of 'who can and cannot be part of the group', symbolically speaking – and boundaries from within – the limits that individuals find in their own repertoire.
<br> 
<br> [...] the rules of membership are left to the discretion of each sovereign state and there is not much discussion on the topic within the academic literature. There is, however, a shared understanding among scholars that 'certain' requirements for the acquisition of dual citizenship must be observed. Hansen and Weil (2002, 11) contend the following:
<br> 
<br> « Those individuals who have been resident in a country the longest have the strongest claim to acquire a member state’s nationality while retaining another. The logic is simple:    such individuals will have contributed most to the society, have built-up a web of social relations, will be best equipped to make informed voting decisions and – importantly – will have to live with the consequences of them [...] »
<br> 
<br> It was not the aim of the thesis to engage with the normative debate, but here may be the place to hint at it: Are the meanings of citizenship and its impact on lived experiences fully grasped to justify such claims?
<br> 
<br> Apart from some individual studies, the limited intellectual creativity within academia concerning dual citizenship clashes with Marshall’s own motivation to advance his study on citizenship and the very contribution he is known for in the field. (I would not be surprised if Marshall himself, these days, would be interested in the topic specifically through the lens of the global movement of people.) As the boundaries of the demographic regime become porous and no longer match that of geographical frontiers – not that it ever has, but unquestionably less than ever –, individuals pursue and create new experiences, belongings, and narratives. In this context, the expansion of dual citizenship is not 'a major challenge to the traditional nation-state model' as it is to academia itself (see Castles and Davidson 2000, 88). Today, most nation-states accept the status and, as Bauböck (2019) noted, for individuals, there is nothing strange or wrong with this.
</span>

<!--  
## Dual Citizenship

<span style="font-size:15px;font-style:italic;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
Dual citizenship means that individuals have legal status as citizens in two sovereign states. It is a striking development because, while it had been regarded during most of the twentieth century as “an anomaly, at best, and an abomination, at worst” (Spiro 2010), it is now inevitable. Therefore, it is remarkable that despite the attention that the topic of citizenship has received in academia in the past decades, the same was not true of dual citizenship. “Although intellectual curiosity and a professional need for publication tend to exhaust all aspects of whatever topic fires academic imagination, the massive interest in citizenship has not spilled over into a concern for dual nationality” (Hansen and Weil 2002, 1) - this notwithstanding an increasing number of people with the status amid a growing acceptance of dual citizenship: scholars were barely grasping the phenomenon, and it already became multiple in nature.
<br>
<br>The academic landscape has changed since then, with gradually more publications being devoted to the topic, however, academics often contemplate ‘problems and possibilities’ of dual citizenship embedded in macro-political concerns that underlie much of the theoretical and normative debate: What does dual citizenship mean for the sovereignty of a state and the international system? Can genuine links between the state and individuals be maintained in this condition? (What are genuine links?) Does this status undermine basic democratic principles? Should dual citizenship be considered a human right?
<br>
<br>Although the ‘fundamental link’ connecting individual-state conferred by formal membership is not an exclusive one in cases of dual citizenship – and, as such, dual citizens may experience its substance in multifaceted ways –, this does not challenge the sovereignty of the nation-state per se. In this sense, Bosniak asserts that “[t]he rise of multiple nationality simply does not represent a ‘shattering’ of citizenship, nor the harbinger of a ‘borderless world’” (2002, 1003). This is easily corroborated by the fact that granting citizenship remains under the discretion and control of the state. Likewise, the post-exclusive shift since the 1990s did not – and does not – presuppose any kind of ‘world parliament or global demos’ (Shachar et al. 2017, 6; see also Bosniak 2002, 997–98). What has changed is that the demographic boundary-maintenance regime no longer holds: “A graphic representation of citizenship status would now be much more complex than a territorial map” (Spiro 2016, 140). As Bauböck points out, while ‘land cannot belong to two states at the same time’, people indeed can (2019, 1020); and from the individual perspective, “there is nothing strange about having multiple but still genuine links to several states” (ibid., 1024–25). Thus, in this new landscape, while the nation-state maintains its authority, citizens are no longer ‘tethered to particular states’ as before (Bosniak 2002, 997).
<br>
<br> Yet another theoretical consideration warrants attention: the terms (dual) citizenship and nationality are not in themselves without complication. In general, they are accepted as synonyms and often treated as such, but scholars writing about the topic normally opt to include a footnote mentioning their preferred choice or how the legal practice has treated this matter18. Rarely, however, the terminological ambiguity is raised. Discussing the modern paradigm of citizenship, Cohen bluntly points out the ambiguity contained in the term national: “it is used both as a synonym for a state’s citizenry (to be a French national is to be a French citizen) and, at the very least, as a cultural category of collective identity” (1999, 254). This issue can take on a deeper level when the context of dual citizenship is taken into account. Even if political communities do not consist of ‘nationally or ethnically homogenous groups’ (Benhabib 2002, 96), these communities are exclusionary nonetheless, and accepting one as a formal member is a decision that rests with the sovereign state. [...] In the context of dual citizenship coupled with immigration, where does that leave the individual? Does one identify oneself with both nation-states? Can such identification be developed? Once one naturalises, is s/he now part of “us” and/or “them”? These are questions at which the literature offers few hints. (My own ‘intellectual curiosity’ concerns “first-generation” immigrants who are dual citizens, and this is the context I have in mind when I think of these questions. 
<br>
<br> Brubaker and Cooper (2000) criticise the very use of ‘identity’ within academic research. The authors argue that, for instance, the literature on nationalism occasionally blurs the line between category of analysis and category of practice, understanding identity as a ‘collective phenomenon’ that implies ‘sameness’ or as a core aspect/condition that ‘is invoked to point to something allegedly deep, basic, abiding, or foundational’ (ibid., 7).
<br>
<br> The post-exclusive turn in citizenship “suggests new dimensions of how humans organize themselves on a changing global landscape” (Spiro 2016, 10). While simultaneous ‘vertical’ or ‘nested’ memberships have traditionally been considered normal20, the widespread acceptance of dual citizenship adds to this plurality by giving rise to multiple horizontal memberships among nation-states (Bosniak 2002, 1004). (Take, for instance, Nussbaum’s (2002) presentation of the Stoic metaphor of the concentric circles.)
<br>
<br>Interestingly, some scholars glance at the individual perspective by criticising T. M. Franck’s interpretation of the shift towards the legitimisation of dual citizenship: an advocate of the right of individuals to freely choose their affiliations and compose their own personal identities, the author saw the growing acceptance of the status by modern states as a reflection of such consciousness (Franck 1996, 359–60). Hence, scholars have tended to limit themselves to one part of Franck’s thesis, leaving unexplored the suggestion that individuals might (want to) develop multiple horizontal identifications during the course of their lives.
<br>
<br> While formal citizenship is no longer needed for an individual to access a variety of civil and social rights – instead, legal residence is –, it continues to be fundamental when it comes to political rights. But Bosniak (2000) raises yet another nuanced, important aspect of the place of the alien – even if a postnational citizen – in a polity: "When citizenship is understood as formal legal membership [...], aliens remain outsiders to citizenship: they reside in the host country only at the country’s discretion". Therefore, it is, interestingly, in the context of immigration that citizenship as a status becomes more visible. From these remarks, it is possible to derive two important points. First, one of the ambiguities of citizenship is that it implies exclusion as much as inclusion (Castles and Davidson 2000). Or in Cohen’s (1999) words, "[citizenship] always establishes privilege insofar as it endows members with particular rights denied to non-members". And second, a fundamental property of formal membership is that it "secures a place to live and offers protection against expulsion" (Bloemraad 2017; see also Bauböck 2019). This right to ‘unconditional residence and (re)admission to the territory’ is frequently mentioned by scholars, however, rather superficially. Lenard (2018) offers an expressive exception. The author argues that the very foundation of citizenship is the right to residential security — even before the right to vote and to hold a passport –, which "[underpins] the confidence [individuals] need to build their life in a place, with the expectation that they can continue to do so" (Lenard 2018). Therefore, while it is true that, on the one hand, the notion of citizenship has been expanded within academia to include various instances of social struggles – to the extent that its possession does not automatically translate into equal access to rights and opportunities – and, on the other hand, more rights are granted to non-citizen residents – as a product of the international discourse on human rights and universalistic conceptions of personhood –, as a status, citizenship is consequential (see Spiro 2010).
</span>

## Belonging

<span style="font-size:15px;font-style:italic;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
In short, feeling of belonging means feeling ‘at home’ (Antonsich 2010, 647; Yuval-Davis 2006, 197). It relates to an emotional, ‘or even ontological’ attachment to a place, which is both material and affective, and implies one’s feeling ‘safe’ (Yuval-Davis, Wemyss, and Cassidy 2018). [...] In this respect, such feeling of belonging does not exist in relation to a cosmopolitan ideal – as Hedetoft and Hjort put it, “belonging requires territorial and historical fixity”, criteria in which “the globe does not qualify” (2002, xviii). It is interesting to note that citizenship as status is one of the factors that lead to feelings of belonging, as it provides security for its holders to manage ‘unease and uncertainty’25 (Antonsich 2010, 647–48). In this respect, Yuval-Davis (2006) emphasises the centrality of spatial rights before discussing other citizenship entitlements, that is, “the right to enter a state or any other territory of a political community and, once inside, the right to remain there”. Here, the thin facet of citizenship is picked up by sociological analyses and given a new quality, for it now underlies the very development of the sense of belonging.
<br>
<br>If “to belong means to find a place where an individual can feel ‘at home’” (Antonsich 2010, 646 emphasis added), it does not seem implausible to suppose that the increased voluntarily global mobility also opens up opportunities for individuals “to lead a life that is meaningful, a life worth living, which, according to hooks (2009, 1) is what to find a place where we belong is all about” (ibid., 649).
<br>
<br>The phenomenon of dual citizenship is as novel as it is controversial because the possession of citizenship implies formal membership, which, as such, refers to a form of belonging to a nation-state. Hence, regardless of how dual citizenship was acquired, two states recognise the individual as rightfully part of their national community and her/his unconditional right to be there. This is by no means a trivial feature. Such belonging that stems from state recognition is tied in with the arsenal of an authoritative institution that ‘seeks to monopolise legitimate symbolic force’ by means of ‘naming, identifying, categorising, and stating what is what and who is who’ (Brubaker and Cooper 2000, 15). As an official status, citizenship is absolute and not dependent on the dialectical interplay between self- identification and external identification (ibid.) or on processes of attachment and othering (Simonsen 2018) that happens in the everyday life. In this sense, dual citizenship disrupts common-sense understandings related to national identity: the authority of the nation-state and the legitimacy of national territorial boundaries do not produce ethnic cohesion and a homogeneous culture. Therefore, even though Skey (2013) emphasises that the ethnic (and rooted) majority draws benefits related to a dominant position in terms of ‘national cultural capital’ (which then becomes a source of psychological security in the face of ‘intensifying global flows’, as well as a tool to fight against it), to assert that they are ‘positioned as one who belongs without question’ is not supported by formal membership (2013, 84, 89, 92 original emphasis)28; even when national and domestic borders have been crossed by the foreigner/immigrant, such lines of exclusion and ‘asymmetric power relations between those included and those outside’ (Pfaff-Czarnecka 2011, 200) cannot be sketched in terms of citizenship as legal status.
<br>
<br>On the other hand, formal membership may not be enough for one to feel completely accepted: “the role of political institutions is not sufficient, if the rest of the society fails to ‘grant’ this recognition” (Antonsich 2010, 650)29. Against this background, if and how the status arising from state recognition influences the negotiation that takes place on the ground, whether in terms feelings of belonging or self-identification, is an empirical question. To be sure, if it is a resource, one might expect it to be for those whose citizenship status has not always been taken as given or whose belonging is not always accepted in the ‘ordinary ebb and flow of social life’ (see Badenhoop 2021; Yanasmayan 2015).
<br>    
<br>Given that nationality is more than sporadically regarded as an identity label associated with a certain collectivity (category of practice), whose boundaries are not conceived as easily traversable (if not only for questions of identity itself, then also based on the long prevailing discourse against dual citizenship), it is certainly interesting to investigate empirically what it means to individuals to be assigned this official categorisation: does it affect their self-understandings? (see Brubaker and Cooper 2000, 27)
</span>

## An Empirical Study

<span style="font-size:15px;font-style:italic;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
An exploratory study set out to analyse the meanings of dual citizenship among a group of Brazilian immigrants living in Europe, which brings together a formal status much debated within the political literature with its sociological implications in a landscape marked by increasing global mobility and movement – not of goods and technologies, but people. The interview guide included questions such as where the interviewees felt at home, what changed when they acquired their second citizenship, and how they self-identified. It also included a hypothetical scenario: had they had to give up the Brazilian citizenship to acquire the second one, would they apply to it anyway? One question that was not initially formulated, but which yielded interesting accounts when it emerged, concerned situations in which the participant felt like a foreigner. 
<br>
<br>Regarding the question of the insider/outsider position in social research (Young 2004): I was also a Brazilian living abroad and, while I wanted to take advantage of 'a shared sense of comfort and ease in interacting' (ibid., 198), I did not want to run the risk of having things unsaid on the premise that “I would know how things are” (not least because I probably did not); thus, I had previously reflected on the possible need to ask them to 'explain more fully or further elucidate their views' (ibid., 196–97). While it was clear to us from the beginning that I was interested in their stories and accounts, I also wondered whether any of them would return me with a question and 'assume the role of the investigator' (De Andrade 2000, 285). This leads me to the next point. While conducting the interviews, it was striking how the conversation was a moment of self-reflection and negotiation for most of them, sometimes accompanied by ambivalences: even if I wished to be the miner-interviewer, 'seeking for nuggets of essential meaning', soon it became clear that I was the traveller instead, 'wandering together with' the respondents (Kvale 1996, 3–5).
</span>

## Findings

<span style="font-size:15px;font-style:italic;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
The instrumental dimension of dual citizenship is observed primarily in the participants’ intention to move to Europe; whatever reasons each may have had, it meant having more options, or more doors opened (an expression raised in different accounts). How does dual citizenship interact with their sense of belonging and self-understanding especially now that they have immigrated? The following sub-sections elaborate on this question across the three categories: found home, home in progress, and pragmatic home.
<br>
<br><strong>Found home</strong>
<br>For this group, the hypothetical scenario of renouncing their Brazilian citizenship to get the other one does not generate any hesitation at first, because, for them, it is a simple matter of being able to stay where they are: this is where they want to be, and where they intend to remain. “Yes”, “I think so”, “I would”. There, they feel at home; there, they have built their own ‘corner of the world’, found dear jobs and relationships, and feel at ease with the surroundings.
<br>
<br><strong>Home in progress</strong>
<br>Here, the question ‘where do you feel at home?’ yields uncertainty. “Ah, that’s a good question, it’s difficult...”. “Phew... this... this is a question, right?”. In the end, they replied that they feel at home where they live now (city/country), because this is where they have their homes. Although it does not resemble the forceful 'I belong here', or 'I found myself here', this feeling of belonging stems from a familiarity with the place (and satisfaction with their current jobs) that reflects a common understanding in the literature around a homely, secure space to return to when one is away (see Hannerz 2002, 218; Skey 2011).
<br>
<br>Would they give their Brazilian citizenship up? One the one hand, their feeling of belonging is not as resolute as that among individuals in the previous category, on the other hand, they do not see themselves returning to Brazil. The answer is ambiguous. It is here that citizenship becomes most salient regarding its property of entitlement to a place within the context of international immigration. To be sure, not because this property is more important to people in this group – it is the very foundation of the reasoning of those who have found home in choosing to renounce their Brazilian citizenship, if necessary –, but because this is where participants reflect most on it when negotiating the response to the hypothetical scenario.
<br>
<br><strong>Pragmatic home</strong>
<br>In pragmatic home, dual citizenship is a paper that allows one to stay where they are. Its underlying characteristic is again the right of place, but no attachment follows, and it is not used as a resource beyond what it strictly is – a permission. In a way, they could be grouped among Ronkainen’s (2011) 'shadow-nationals', except for the fact that they are not the ‘suitcase-type of living in several countries’ nor engaged in a transnational life. Thus, they are not exactly cosmopolitans, and their idea of home is a pragmatic one. 
</span>
-->

<!---

<span style="font-size:15px;font-style:italic;color:var(--global-text-color-light)">
Global mobility and international immigration bring to citizenship – understood as formal membership, and as such, associated primarily with the political realm – a sociological implication that has not been duly incorporated into the academic debate. Within a macro and normative approach, which has been the centre of the literature on dual citizenship, debaters are essentially concerned with political issues; and these political concerns are transposed to the new scenario of increasing (and increasingly fluid) international movement of people, as if, once determined, they would suffice to resolve all that that matters. Strikingly, however, there is a scarcity of research on the micro perspective – and so the debate abounds with assumptions that may or may not make sense, or it tends to generalise findings without pondering the diverse nature of the phenomenon. Making sense of dual citizenship in the contemporary world requires the enthusiasm of scholars to study this topic as much as a reserve to recognise that it involves multiple circumstances – and more than that, it involves personal narratives entangled in a broader web of meaning-making. Revealingly, Spiro argues that dual citizenship ultimately undermines state-based identities (2016, 131). Even though he is an ardent defender of the tolerance of the status, unlike Franck (1996), he does not conceive of multiple horizontal belongings. Hence, « plural citizenship will almost always involve one citizenship that is dearer than the other » (Spiro 2010, 128). <strong>What does dearer mean, though? And to which dual citizens?</strong>
<br> 
<br> If dual citizenship is only measured in political terms – or to fit a closed understanding of it –, then the “use” of each one becomes invariably ‘asymmetrical’ and potentially mutually exclusive. However, people assign meanings to this status on different grounds than those that the literature has traditionally considered (and been willing to fathom). Moving beyond the notion that it is just an instrumental asset, empirical studies have uncovered new dimensions in the way dual citizenship is interpreted within long-distance naturalisations: Knott (2019) found that people simply understand it to be their right, and Leuchter (2014) that, regardless of the motivation to pursue a second citizenship, the status became a tool that strengthens one’s attachment to their country of origin. <strong>What about dual citizens who are also immigrants?</strong> Are they bound to be only ‘legal aliens’ enjoying a bureaucratic convenience? Yanasmayan’s (2015) brilliant study transcended the conventional construct that allowing immigrants to keep their original citizenship leads to higher rates of naturalisation (and this, in turn, to better social and economics outcomes). It revealed deeper levels of understanding of the impact of dual citizenship on lived experiences: the toleration of the status allowed Turkish immigrants to retain an emotional link with it more generally, paving the way for new experiences of meaningful belonging. My findings point to the same direction: <strong>dual citizenship is not about transferring or dividing loyalties, as it is about extending possibilities of belonging </strong> – for if dual citizenship is instrumentally used to immigrate or remain in the host state, it is the very pillar of one’s feeling of belonging (even if this belonging is perceived differently among people). In this respect, the literature on belonging can play an essential role in illuminating the “wh-questions” of the significance of dual citizenship in the context of immigration, as it provides mechanisms to understand how the status is linked to life experiences in subtle, unexplored ways.
<br>
<br> As most of the individuals I interviewed have acquired dual citizenship on the basis of ancestry, I take this clue within the literature to discuss my findings:
<br>
<br>    "Dual citizenship offered for third-country citizens by various EU member states raises another novel dilemma. [...] As critics note, these states ‘open back doors’ to the EU by generously handing out citizenship to many third-country nationals, who may move and work in any of the EU member states." (Pogonyi 2011, 699)
<br> 
<br> This form of naturalisation is commonly understood as an external citizenship, whose significance is exhausted in being a ‘portable good’ within a stratified global society (Harpaz 2015, 2019; Harpaz and Mateos 2019). However, <strong>if immigration takes place, then Pogonyi’s remark is accurate: as my research has shown, these ‘back doors to the EU’ did open the door to the homes of the people I interviewed.</strong>
<br> 
<br> Regardless of whether Franck’s (1996) thesis about the reason behind the growing tolerance of dual citizenship was correct or not, the experiences of the participants in my study are in consonance with his understanding that people can develop multiple national affiliations and possibly ‘identities’ – and that such multiple belonging may become an essential part of one’s personal narrative. The people I interviewed have chosen to immigrate and make their host societies their home – those under ‘home in progress’, at least for now – and many display aspects of self-identification that reflects an active personal pursuit – even if as ‘Europeans’. This path is one that admittedly encounters ambivalences and confrontations. And in this scenario, what becomes salient is the role that citizenship plays, in that it formally grants their right to stay, permanently, where they are; <strong>they do not have to recurrently answer the question “why are you here?” to secure temporary permission with the administrative authorities.</strong> In short, they are entitled to the place.
<br> 
<br> The participants are much aware of citizenship as a project of the <strong>politics of belonging</strong>, for it is this property that gives them confidence to ‘build their lives [and homes] there, with the expectation that they can continue to do so’ (Lenard 2018). In this sense, with the official status, they know that they also ‘belong without question’ (Skey 2013); <strong>citizenship is absolute</strong>. For them, formal membership is not ‘just another bureaucratic hurdle to make life a little bit easier’, like those who respond to ‘the call for the Super Citizen’ with disaffection in Badenhoop’s study (2021, 575). This points to a specificity of the sample in this study: they are a young and mobile generation for whom immigration is/becomes an option, not a necessity. It is in this context that a EU passport stands out, as it also allows individuals to settle in different countries within the Union (it would be interesting to compare this with how native Europeans of similar age and educational background make sense of and use their European passport – Blanchard’s (2020) research, for instance, shows that young Italians born in Italy are engaged in a similar intra-EU mobility as the Argentinian and Chilean dual citizens she studied).
<br> 
<br> The respondents do not lead transnational lives as they tend to limit their understanding of home to where they reside now. In general, being in Brazil corresponds to familiarity, but also to nostalgia or a ‘live museum’ of their own lives. Thus, these individuals are not ‘longing-to-be’ in Brazil, nor have they joined a community of Brazilians in their host societies in the quest to keep “home” close (Hedetoft and Hjort 2002, vii). This leads to the next point. In contrast to children born to immigrant parents in Simonsen’s study (2018), the participants moved to their host countries as adults and, as such, they did not always belong in these societies; their feeling at home is not ‘self-evident’ for ‘having been born and raised in the country and always lived there’ (Simonsen 2018, 133). Importantly, however, in line with Simonsen’s findings, mine also show that <strong>one does not need to identify with the national collectivity – and be seen as one – to feel at home and feel like staying </strong>– after all, they are formally entitled to do so. That being said, self-identification, even if as a process with a situational character (or precisely as one), does seem to be an important element for those in “found home” – a process of becoming negotiated in the everyday life amid symbolic boundaries from the native-national community – in the question of “who can and cannot be part of the group”, symbolically speaking – and boundaries from within – the limits that individuals find in their own repertoire.
<br> 
<br> Lastly, [... ] the rules of membership are left to the discretion of each sovereign state and there is not much discussion on the topic within the academic literature. There is, however, a shared understanding among scholars that “certain” requirements for the acquisition of dual citizenship must be observed. Hansen and Weil (2002, 11) contend the following:
<br> 
<br>    "Those individuals who have been resident in a country the longest have the strongest claim to acquire a member state’s nationality while retaining another. The logic is simple:    such individuals will have contributed most to the society, have built-up a web of social relations, will be best equipped to make informed voting decisions and – importantly – will have to live with the consequences of them [...]"
<br> 
<br> It was not the aim of the thesis to engage with the normative debate, but here may be the place to hint at it: <strong>Are the meanings of citizenship and its impact on lived experiences fully grasped to justify such claims?</strong>
<br> 
<br> Apart from some individual studies, the limited intellectual creativity within academia concerning dual citizenship clashes with Marshall’s own motivation to advance his study on citizenship and the very contribution he is known for in the field. (I would not be surprised if Marshall himself, these days, would be interested in the topic specifically through the lens of the global movement of people.) <strong>As the boundaries of the demographic regime become porous and no longer match that of geographical frontiers – not that it ever has, but unquestionably less than ever –, individuals pursue and create new experiences, belongings, and narratives</strong>. In this context, the expansion of dual citizenship is not ‘a major challenge to the traditional nation-state model’ as it is to academia itself (see Castles and Davidson 2000, 88). Today, most nation-states accept the status and, as Bauböck (2019) noted, for individuals, there is nothing strange or wrong with this.
</span>
-->