---
layout: post
title: journal
date:   2024-08-01
description: 
tags: english
# categories: miscellaneous

---

Then, I find myself in Italy for the first time in my life. I’ve just left Germany for good but haven’t realised it quite well; 
after all, I have anticipated my departure just as anticipating that next year I have birthday. And I realise I find it challenging; I still have to write that last thing connecting me to Germany – and as long as no German asks it, I’m free again to pronounce my last name my way (which, in itself, should be felt as freedom, but it comes to my mind in chains). Anyway, then I find myself in Italy having breakfast with a French and a German... no joking’s coming. No sad story connecting theirs either. The French tells me of a friend who was born in Vienna but grew up in France and feels very much French – I’m sure that’s interesting, but I cannot relate it to what I’m seeking to explore, that is, to my research. In contrast, the German shares with me the story of a friend: being raised in Germany to Bosnian parents, at a certain age this friend opted for the German citizenship and, for that, had to give her Bosnian citizenship up (I catch myself reflecting, Not every choice is freedom). In the middle of the process, she found herself, for a brief period, whatever it is, in an unusual situation: statelessness (which, I am aware, is an unusual situation even for macro standards). Having already surrendered the first citizenship, her friend was waiting for the German one to be issued. Allegedly, she confided to her friend: I feel unwanted.
<br>– Isn’t that right? How could it be any different?
